Transport Oriented Development The first stage of the NSW Government’s Transport Oriented Development (TOD) planning reforms was implemented through introduction of new planning controls at Chapter 5 of State Environmental Planning Policy (Housing) 2021 . The amended planning controls apply within identified station precincts to allow more well-located homes. We have prepared a guide to provide additional information to assist those who will prepare and assess development applications under the TOD planning controls. The guidance will be updated over time and can be used in conjunction with Chapter 5 in the Housing SEPP. View Guidance to Transport Oriented Development (PDF, 1.8 MB) . The new planning controls for the Transport Oriented Development areas are: New planning controls Expand all Collapse all Permissibility Residential flat buildings are permitted in residential zones and local centre zones in TOD areas. Shop top housing is permitted in local centre and commercial zones. Building height A maximum height of 22m applies to residential flat buildings and 24 m for shop top housing to accommodate increased ceiling heights for ground floor commercial premises. Floor Space Ratio A maximum Floor Space Ratio of 2.5:1 applies to both residential flat buildings and shop top housing. Lot size and width Introduction of a minimum lot width of 21 m and no minimum lot size. Affordable housing 2% of floor area for developments with a minimum Gross Floor Area of 2,000 m2 must be provided as affordable housing in perpetuity. The affordable housing must be managed by a registered community housing provider. These requirements are secured through prescribed development consent conditions set out in the Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2021 . train Where do the new planning controls apply? The Transport Oriented Development planning controls commenced on 13 May 2024 and now apply to a total of 25 precincts. Alternative schemes have been implemented through updates to the relevant local environmental plan for 12 precincts. An alternative scheme is now being considered for the remaining precinct at Cockle Creek and is expected to be finalised in the coming months. Stations The status of planning controls for each station: Station Local Government Area (LGA) Status Adamstown Newcastle TOD controls applied May 2024 Ashfield Inner West TOD controls applied January 2025 Banksia Bayside TOD controls applied July 2024 Belmore Canterbury-Bankstown Council controls applied February 2026 Berala Cumberland TOD controls applied November 2024 Booragul Lake Macquarie TOD controls applied May 2024 Canterbury Canterbury-Bankstown Council controls applied May 2025 Cardiff Lake Macquarie TOD controls applied May 2024 Cockle Creek Lake Macquarie Alternative scheme under assessment Corrimal Wollongong TOD controls applied May 2024 Croydon Burwood/Inner West TOD controls applied February 2025/Council controls applied February 2026 Dapto Wollongong TOD controls applied July 2024 Dulwich Hill Inner West TOD controls applied January 2025 Gordon Ku-ring-gai Council controls applied November 2025 Gosford Central Coast TOD controls applied July 2024 Hamilton Newcastle TOD controls applied May 2024 Killara Ku-ring-gai Council controls applied November 2025 Kogarah Bayside/Georges River TOD controls applied May 2024 Kotara Newcastle TOD controls applied May 2024 Lakemba Canterbury-Bankstown Council controls applied February 2026 Lidcombe Cumberland TOD controls applied May 2024 Lindfield Ku-ring-gai Council controls applied November 2025 Marrickville Inner West TOD controls applied January 2025 Morisset Lake Macquarie TOD controls applied May 2024 Newcastle Interchange Newcastle TOD controls applied May 2024 North Strathfield Metro Canada Bay TOD controls applied November 2024 North Wollongong Wollongong Council controls applied October 2025 Punchbowl Canterbury-Bankstown Council controls applied April 2026 Rockdale Bayside TOD controls applied July 2024 Roseville Ku-ring-gai Council controls applied November 2025 St Marys Metro Penrith Council controls applied February 2026 Teralba Lake Macquarie TOD controls applied May 2024 Tuggerah Central Coast TOD controls applied July 2024 Turrella Bayside TOD controls applied May 2024 Wiley Park Canterbury-Bankstown Council controls applied April 2026 Woy Woy Central Coast TOD controls applied May 2024 Wyong Central Coast TOD controls applied May 2024 Check if the planning controls apply to your property You can search your home or business address to see if your property is within the Transport Oriented Development area on the NSW Planning Spatial Viewer : Click on the text 'Filter Layers' on the left of the screen to activate the search function. Type 'Transport Oriented Development'. Under the heading 'SEPP (Housing) 2021', click the check box to the left of 'Transport Oriented Development Sites Map'. The land to which the policy applies will now be displayed in the spatial viewer. If your local council has proposed an alternative to the TOD controls, you will need to check the relevant LEP to find out which planning controls apply. Frequently asked questions New planning controls for Transport Oriented Development stations were introduced through changes to State Environmental Planning Policy (Housing) 2021 in April 2024. Over the next 15 years, the Transport Oriented Development program is estimated to deliver more than 170,000 new homes across the 37 identified precincts. Expand all Collapse all What is the status of the Ku-ring-gai Council alternative scheme? Ku-ring-gai Council’s alternative scheme for the Transport Oriented Development (TOD) precincts at Gordon, Killara, Lindfield and Roseville came into effect on 14 November 2025. Council’s alternative scheme replaces the TOD planning controls in State Environmental Planning Policy (Housing) 2021 (the Housing SEPP) with a different set of planning controls under the Ku-ring-gai Local Environmental Plan. More information is available on the Ku-ring-gai Council website . What planning controls will apply to development applications that are lodged for Ku-ring-gai TOD precincts? Ku-ring-gai Council’s planning controls for the Transport Oriented Development (TOD) precincts at Gordon, Killara, Lindfield and Roseville came into effect on 14 November 2025. Development Applications that were in the system on or before 13 June 2025 will be assessed under the TOD provisions. New development applications will be assessed against the controls in council’s LEP. Is affordable housing required under the policy? Yes. The TOD planning controls in the Housing SEPP require at least 2% of floor space to be used for affordable housing. The alternative approaches that have been implemented through council local environmental plans also require affordable housing, with rates varying according to the location. Can a transport oriented development use other affordable housing provisions from the Housing SEPP? Yes. The Infill Affordable Housing incentives in the Housing SEPP also apply in Transport Oriented Development locations, with contributions to be in addition to the requirement to provide 2% affordable housing in perpetuity. Does the Apartment Design Guide apply to TOD developments? Yes. The Apartment Design Guide remains the guiding document for apartment development, including developments in Transport Oriented Development locations. What about properties that have split zones? Where a lot contains 2 or more land-use zones, the Transport Oriented Development controls only apply to the portion of land that has a relevant zone. For example, if a property is partially zoned MU1 Mixed-use and R4 High-density Residential, only the portion of the site that is R4 High-density Residential can be developed under the Transport Oriented Development controls. Can a development application that has already been approved take advantage of the TOD planning controls? The TOD planning controls do not apply to a development application made, but not determined, on or before 13 May 2024. The controls also do not apply to a modification made after 13 May 2024 if it relates to a development consent granted on or before 13 May 2024. Resources Transport Oriented Development Program (PDF, 2.3 MB) get_app What we heard – Transport Oriented Development policy consultation (PDF, 8.2 MB) get_app Guidance to Transport Oriented Development (PDF, 1.8 MB) get_app Transport Oriented Development – Guide to strategic planning (PDF, 571 KB) get_app Updated 24 April 2026